## Related work
{:#related_work}

Sparnatural builds on the visual paradigm of [ResearchSpace semantic search component](cite:cites researchspace), but improves the user experience and is more expressive, with support for `OPTIONAL` and `NOT EXISTS`.

[RDFExplorer](cite:cites rdfexplorer) is another graph-based SPARQL builder. Sparnatural is less expressive than RDFExplorer (in particular it can generate only tree-shaped queries, not complete basic graph pattern), but we believe more end-user-friendly. The presentation of [RDFExplorer](cite:cites rdfexplorer) cites [Bhowmick et al.](cite:cites bhowmick) to summarize the challenges of _visual graph querying paradigm_: (1) the development of graph queries requires a considerable cognitive effort; (2) users need to be able to express their goal in a systematic and correct manner, which is antagonistic with the goal of catering to lay users; (3) it is more intuitive to "draw" graph queries than to write them, which implies the need for intuitive visual interfaces. [Bhowmick et al.](cite:citee bhowmick) claim that current visual querying tools suffer from poor aesthetics. They further indicate important primitives that such tools should support to cater to diverse users and support diverse queries: _edge creation_, _pattern creation_ and _example-based querying_. Aside from this, they emphasize _action-aware query processing_ in which the system is able to deliver partial information and immediate feedback while the user is developing the query, based on _dynamic result exploration and visualization_.

[RDFExplorer](cite:cites rdfexplorer) highlights key features of other _query editors and builders_, such as: autocompletion, example-based-querying, dynamic results and non-emptiness guarantee. Sparnatural does offer autocompletion; while not exactly an example-based querying system, Sparnatural can provide example query patterns that can be loaded in the interface to help the user understand the structure of the graph; if configured so, Sparnatural can provide dynamic results; and some non-emptiness guarantee is provided, but limited to the current line, and not the complete query pattern.

In the same family of tools, [Visual SPARQL Builder](cite:cites visual_sparql_builder) proposes a visual query building pane similar to RDFExplorer, while [A-QuB](cite:cites a-qub) is more form-based. Sparnatural strikes a balance between pure graph-representation of the query pattern and form-based querying, with the query pattern clearly visible in the HTML structure, while using forms in widget to input value criteria (dropdown list, autocomplete field, calendar, tree, etc.).
